you're listening to a teaching from Reality LA.
I'll be preaching today on Matthew chapter 1, verses 18 through 25, and I've titled this sermon, God's relentless desire to dwell with his people.
And as you turn to Matthew 1, let me tell you a quick story.
This is in 1916, there was an explorer named Ernest Shackleton,
whose ship going to Antarctica was crushed by ice, its sank, and it left him and his crew alone in Antarctica.
And after months of starvation and freezing temperatures but still surviving, Shackleton left the crew and sailed 800 miles in a lifeboat across the most dangerous ocean on Earth so that he could come back for his men.
He made it through storms, ice, and exhaustion.
And when he finally reached them, the first thing he said was, are you all here?
He refused to leave a single one behind.
And that's what love does.
Love doesn't abandon.
Love doesn't stay safe.
Love crosses impossible distances to be with the one it loves.
And Christmas tells us that God went even further.
And what we're going to see in Matthew chapter one is that God feels that way about us.
Distance was not acceptable.
Separation was not the end of the story.
So God came to be with us.
Let me read to you Matthew chapter one, verses 18 through 25, the Christmas story of how God came to be with us.
And then I'll pray that God would speak to us through this story.
Matthew one starting in verse 18.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ took place in this way.
When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit.
And her husband Joseph, being a just man and unwilling to put her to shame, resolved to divorce her quietly.
But as he considered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream saying, Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife, for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.
All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet.
Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, which means God with us.
When Joseph woke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him.
He took his wife, but he knew her not until she had given birth to his son, and he called his name Jesus.
This is God's word, pray with me.
God, we pray this morning that you would slow down our hearts and focus our minds on the simple but beautiful truth that you have come to us in your son Jesus Christ and that you are with us.
God, we pray that
through this time that we would learn to relate to you, not based on our merit, our performance, but by your grace.
You are a gracious God, merciful, abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness.
And Lord, I pray this morning for those who are here who don't know you as Savior, I pray that you would reveal yourself to them this morning, that they wouldn't just go through a Christmas service,
but they would have an encounter with the living Christ.
And I pray for all of us, no matter what we're going through, no matter what we're carrying right now in this season, that we would know that you are with us and that that's enough.
We pray this in Jesus' name, amen, amen.
Well, the birth of Christ is a simple but powerful story.
And yet what we have here in Matthew chapter 1 is not a picturesque nativity scene where the stable smells like a candle from target.
Everyone is softly backlit and the animals are strangely well behaved.
No, this was a messy, scandalous scene full of confusion, fear, and the very risk of real shame.
You see, Mary and Joseph were betrothed.
That means that they were legally pledged to be married, bound to one another in every way that mattered in the world, and yet the marriage had not yet been consummated.
And then Mary is found to be pregnant.
Now this wasn't sweet or sentimental.
It was shocking.
It was a moment of shame, crisis, and deep personal pain.
And yet, right there,
In the middle of what looks like a disaster, they encounter grace in the most unexpected way.
The angel appears and says, don't be afraid for this is from the Holy Spirit.
And then in verse 21, the angel declares, she will bear a son and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.
In other words, this child is the Savior King, the one who will rescue us from our sin and renew all of creation.
But this wasn't a random event or a last second decision by God.
It was the fulfillment of a promise spoken hundreds of years earlier by the prophet Isaiah.
He said, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son and they shall call his name Emmanuel.
This child is the promised Savior, the one who will remove our shame, defeat evil, and fulfill all of our longings.
He is the one who can truly bring peace on earth.
But the key phrase that I want to slow down and sit with today is when the angel says they shall call his name Immanuel, which means God with us.
It's amazing.
I mean, this is one of the most powerful combinations of three words that you will ever hear in your life.
And every single one of those words is exploding with meaning.
And together these words communicate an idea that can change your life.
Jesus is Immanuel, God with us.
And so I want to invite you to slow down with me and reflect on this name of Jesus Immanuel.
and explore the depth of each word.
And so first, who is this child?
He is God with us.
If you think about it, most people across all cultures and generations believe in some kind of God or deity or higher power.
For Plato, it was the unmoved mover.
For someone like Oprah, it's the energy of the universe.
For many young people today, the divine isn't out there.
It's in here that self becomes sacred.
But most people believe in the divine at some level.
And yet, the Christmas story tells us something radically different.
It tells us that this vulnerable, helpless infant lying in a manger is God himself.
Not that a baby somehow became God, but that the eternal Son who has always existed stepped into our broken world as a man to bring healing and hope.
And this is mind-blowing.
It means that the king of the world came as a servant.
The infinite became an infant.
The one who holds the universe together allowed himself to be held.
The God who fills the heavens, made himself small enough.
to fit in the nook of Mary's elbow.
And so what does this tell us about God?
Well, people across cultures and across centuries have always wondered, what is God like?
Christmas gives us an answer.
It's not an abstract idea, but a person.
God is like Jesus.
And when we look at Jesus, we discover that God is not distant or detached.
He's compassionate.
He's sacrificial, He's present, and above all, He's loving.
He's loving.
That's why God would come in such a humble way because He didn't come merely to fix something that's broken or correct something that's out of line.
He came because when He thinks about you, He's moved by love.
He's overwhelmed with compassion.
He's driven by mercy for you.
That's the kind of God that Christmas reveals, a God who comes close, a God who enters into the mess, a God of self-giving love.
Think about it.
God did not come with a legion of soldiers or a display of overwhelming power.
He didn't come as a conqueror, a philosopher, or a political ruler.
He came as an infant, born to an unwed teenage girl in a town that anyone had hardly heard of.
He came in love.
That's what God is like.
And that changes everything.
This may seem obvious, but if you pull God out of this story, it's just another birth story.
And the same is true of spirituality in general.
If you pull God out of it, you're left with empty rituals, unkept promises, and religious buildings.
It may look impressive on the outside, but it lacks the power to heal what's broken inside.
But the Christmas story refuses to let us do that.
At the center of the story is not an idea, a moral example, or a vague spiritual feeling.
It's God himself drawing near.
And when God is present, it changes everything.
Hope becomes real.
And faith is no longer reaching up to God, but about receiving the God who has come down to us.
And that leads us to the next word in this life-changing phrase.
Jesus is God with us.
With, what a powerful word.
And I want us to reflect on this because I think for many people, they think about it primarily in terms of God over us.
He's a king who reigns over all.
He made us, God over us.
And yes, of course, that's true.
We celebrate the sovereignty of God.
He is over us, but we can't stop there.
And so some people will go moved from there to God for us.
That he sent his son Jesus to die for our sins and to rise from the grave so that we could be redeemed.
And again, yes and amen.
God is for us.
But we can't stop there.
God, we have to praise God above us and God for us.
But what we see in this story is God with us.
This is our greatest good.
In fact,
He reigns over us and dies for us so that he could be with us.
This is what it culminates in.
God doesn't ultimately want something from you, like your obedience or your service.
He wants you.
He loves you.
He cares about you.
He longs to be with you.
And this idea of God being with us is not a
Random detail of the Christmas story.
This is the storyline of the Bible.
In Genesis three, God walks in the garden with Adam and Eve.
In the Old Testament, the tabernacle was where God dwelt with his people in the wilderness.
The temple is how God dwelt with his people in the promised land.
And then the whole story culminates in Jesus, who is the true tabernacle, the true temple.
He is Emmanuel, God with us.
And then you get all the way to the end of the Bible in Revelation 21.
And God declares that He will dwell with His people in the new creation.
And so throughout the story of Scripture, we see God's relentless desire to dwell with His people.
Nothing can stop Him from this, not sin, not the devil, not even death.
And Christmas is the moment.
When God's desire to dwell with his people finally steps into history.
When God doesn't just promise his presence, but arrives in person.
I remember a time when I was a kid and my family went out and I got separated from my parents in the midst of a crowd.
And as soon as I was separated from my parents, I was lost.
I felt anxious.
I was afraid.
I started freaking out.
I didn't know where to go or what to do.
But my dad found me.
And as soon as I was with my dad, everything was fine.
I felt calm.
I felt at peace.
I knew what we were doing.
I knew where we were going.
Well, without God, we're lost.
And so, of course, we're gonna be afraid.
We're gonna be anxious.
We're not gonna go.
We're not gonna know where we're going or what we're doing or who we are.
And yet with God, we can have calm.
We can have peace.
I'm not saying it's easy.
But we can have purpose because of God's presence in our lives.
I think about what David said in Psalm 23, even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil.
Why?
For you are with me.
That's what brings us peace, even in the storm.
That's what brings us calm, even amid the chaos.
that God is with us.
This is our greatest good.
And this is what the story of Christmas is about.
And it's all in this powerful word with.
But I want to acknowledge that there are at least two ways of thinking about God that will prevent us from this.
Because it sounds like a great idea, right?
God wants to be with me.
I want to be with God.
But there's two ways of thinking about God that not only can, but actually do prevent a lot of people from experiencing God's presence in this way.
And the first way is that that prevents this is when we think of God as a transactional God.
And at this time of year, it's easy to explain what a transactional relationship looks like.
He's making a list.
He's checking it twice.
He's going to find out who's naughty or nice.
Right?
I mean, this is how Santa works, right?
Like, if you do good, you get more presents.
If you don't, you get a lump of coal.
And what's interesting is that nobody strives for a relationship with Santa.
You ever notice that?
Nobody's ever sitting around in March being like, we're Santa, I miss him.
Like, no, like he just shows up once a year, drops off gifts, and then leaves and we wait for him later next year.
And so when it comes to Santa, we like the gifts more than the giver, and we've kind of all accepted that that's okay, right?
But here's the thing, God is not like that.
He does not desire nor is he okay with a transactional relationship.
So he gives gifts, yes, but it's not based on our merit.
It's completely based on his grace, his unconditional love for you.
And so our relationship with God is not dependent on our religious performance, but on His grace.
He's gracious.
That's who God is.
He's not a transactional God.
But not only does God give us gifts of grace, His greatest gift is that He gives us Himself so that we can know Him and be known by Him, so that we can love Him and be loved by Him.
so that we can have a deep, loving, intimate relationship with Him.
God is not like an absent dad who tries to buy his kid's love with gifts, but doesn't have time to be with them.
No, God gives us many gifts, but what his heart beats for, what he loves most, is simply to be with us.
He's not a transactional God.
He's a relational God.
That's why being with Him is our greatest good.
And so having a transactional view of God will prevent us from experiencing the presence of God in this way.
But the other thing, the second thing that will prevent us from this is viewing God as a distant God.
I think many people believe in God, but they assume that He doesn't care.
He's aloof.
He doesn't understand.
He's not involved.
He's a distant God.
But listen to what A.W.
Tozer once said, the incarnation is a message to the world that God will not stay at a distance.
He has come.
He has drawn near.
And once you know God with us, you can never believe in a distant God again.
Isn't that beautiful?
Once you see this, that God is with us and sending His Son, you can never believe in a distant God again.
And brothers and sisters, let's not just think about this in theory.
Whatever you are going through, whatever you are experiencing, God is with you.
God is with you in your anxiety.
God is with you in your depression.
God is with you in your loneliness.
God is with you in your relational tension.
God is with you in your exhaustion.
God is with you in your loss.
God is with you in your suffering.
God is with you in your physical pain.
God is with you in your waiting.
And if we ever forget that, we only need to look to Jesus who is Emmanuel, God with us.
He's not a distant God.
He's the God who has drawn near to us in love.
So maybe we remember this.
Our greatest good is not what we do for God.
It's not even what we receive from God.
Our greatest good is that we get to be with God.
Now, we also need to reflect on the significance of this last two-letter word, us.
God with us.
There's so much grace in this one little word.
And I want you to notice, it doesn't say God with me.
It couldn't say that, and that would be true.
That's amazing.
But it says more than that, God with us.
Christ came so that we would be reconciled to God and so that we would be adopted into His family.
And that family, by the way, is not a bunch of perfect people who've got it all figured out.
Now, just before this passage in Matthew 1 is the family line of Jesus.
And what's included in that genealogy is a prostitute.
a murderer, a thief, an adulterer, and many who are on the fringes of society.
They're not good people who God rewarded.
They're sinful people that God redeemed.
And the family line of Jesus teaches us that Jesus came from sinners and outcasts and that Jesus came for sinners and outcasts.
And so Christmas reminds us
That Jesus didn't come for people who have it all together.
He came for people who know that they're hurting, broken, overlooked, weary, and on the verge of giving up.
I know that that's many of you here today.
Jesus came for you.
And the good news of Christmas is not only that God has come to us, but that in Him we have one another.
God with us.
Now, I'm so glad that we have a lot of our children in here with us today, but I also know that I've lost most of you at this point, okay?
So kids, can I have your attention?
Because I want to tell you about my favorite Christmas movie.
Okay, my favorite Christmas movie is Home Alone, all right?
Now, maybe all the little kids haven't seen it.
You need to trust your parents if when is the age-appropriate time for you to watch that, all right?
Let's just say that there's some sibling interactions that don't exactly represent Christ in the movie, okay?
But when you watch it, you'll see that this is a movie about a kid whose parents go off to, or family goes off to vacation in France, and he gets left home alone.
Now, of course, Kevin McAllister spends almost the entire movie alone.
I mean, it's called home alone, but
There is one scene where he enters into community and has a significant experience and that's when he enters into the church.
You remember the scene?
He walks into the church, he sees the color of the stained glass windows, the warmth of the candles, the cross lifted high above all.
He sits down in an empty pew and then he hears the choir singing and all of a sudden it's beautiful, it's peaceful, he's calm,
And then he notices across the aisle, an old man, a man that he assumed was scary, terrifying, maybe even dangerous.
But then the man comes and begins to talk with him and he realizes that he's not frightening.
He's lonely.
He's a man who's been estranged from his own family.
And they have this powerful conversation about fear and reconciliation and loving people through our pain.
It's a heartwarming moment.
And then, of course, it goes on to one of the greatest cinematic scenes of all time, where Kevin outwits and humiliates Harry and Marv in his own home.
But at the end of the movie, the old man is reunited with his family on Christmas Day, and Kevin is reconciled with his family and their own home.
And think about it, amid the whole movie about being alone, Kevin has this one positive communal experience, and it's in the church, a place marked by God's presence.
And I tell that story because the church is meant to be the place where we run to endanger and find peace and solace.
And God has called us not to individual spirituality, but to a communal, embodied faith where we experience God's redeeming grace together.
The good news is not only that we're with God, but that we're with one another.
God is with us.
talked about these three words, God with us.
But I want to close by talking about how much the order of these words matters.
The message of the Bible is not us with God.
We do not ascend to Him with works.
That's what every other religion is ultimately about.
We don't ascend to God in works.
He descends to us in grace.
We don't meet Him halfway.
Christmas tells us that He came all the way in love for us.
And that's why when we talk about love on Christmas, may we remember that we don't initiate love with God.
We respond to His love that initiated with us.
1 John 4 19 says it explicitly.
We love because He first loved us.
And this love isn't a nice holiday gesture.
as if God's love would enhance our otherwise okay lives.
No, God's love is absolutely necessary to get us out of this mess that we've got ourselves into.
You see, the Bible says that because of our sin, that we are separated from God.
We're separated from God because of our sin.
We are not with God.
We are separated from Him.
But in love, Christ came for us.
And Jesus is the mediator between a just God and a unholy, sinful people.
And so he comes to us and we see in this story that he came to the lowest of lows, the most vulnerable place imaginable, but the story doesn't stop in the manger.
Jesus went to the cross and it's there where we see the fullness of God's love for us.
Romans 5.8 says, God demonstrates His love in this, that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
He died in our place for our sin so that we could be forgiven, washed clean, reconciled to God, and given a new life.
Only in Christ can we say, God is with us.
But it doesn't even stop there after the manger and the cross.
We have the empty tomb.
Because on that Sunday, he got up, he rose from the grave, conquering sin, Satan, and death so that we can have eternal life and we can know that he is with us no matter what comes our way in this life.
Jesus is Emmanuel, the one who came to be with us and to save us.
And this salvation truly is the greatest gift of all.
You know, in just a few days,
we'll be able to open presence, to sit under the tree.
Kids, you know the anticipation is building up your longing and that moment will come.
I can see them smiling right now.
That moment will come when you get to unwrap that present and you experience the joy of that gift.
But what we read in scripture is that the greatest gift truly is the gift of salvation in Christ.
It's not a momentary gift, it's an eternal gift.
It's not something that you will ever grow tired of or move on from, but that you will go deeper into its riches, the rest of your life, and for all of eternity.
And I want you to listen to what Ephesians chapter two says about how we receive that gift.
Ephesians two eight says, for by grace you have been saved through faith.
And this is not your own doing, it is the gift of God.
So salvation is a gift.
It's not deserved.
You can't earn it.
It's just because God is abounding and mercy and love for you.
And yet, how do we receive a gift with open hands?
We open it up and we receive it with joy and with gratitude.
That's what faith is.
It's letting go of the grip of our own lives, opening up to receive the gift of God's grace, with joy and with gratitude, and then with a response that says, my life is yours.
I want to live the life of joy and gratitude and worship because of what God has done for me in Christ.
That's the good news.
And so this Christmas, whatever you're carrying, whatever you're walking through, may you remember there is hope, there is peace, there is joy because Christ has come.
And that means that God is with us.
Pray with me.
God, we thank you so much.
that your response to our sin, to our own brokenness is to draw near to us.
And that you've done that, Lord, in the most tangible way possible, in sending your son in the flesh who became a vulnerable infant for us, who lived a perfect life.
for us, who died for us, who rose for us, and who reigns on high for us.
And so, God, we pray that you would give us the faith to receive of your grace.
And God made the joy well up in our hearts, seeing who you are and what you've done for us.
We thank you that no matter what comes our way and that because of Christ, we can know that you are with us.
We pray this in His name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening.
For more audio and video content, please visit realityla.com.